# NFL_Exploration_and_Predictions
An exploration of NFL play-by-play data from 1999-2021

This repository contains visualizations of general trends and player stats. The dataset was also used to train a linear regression model to predict the number of wins for each of the 32 NFL teams in the 2021 season. The data was cleaned and manipulated by using the tidyverse package in R, while visualizations were generated by using the ggplot2 package.

There are several plots contained in the repository, which provide insight into outstanding contributions that certain players provide with respect to the final outcome of a game. These plots can be used by coaches to gameplan and decide which players are most valuable in winning a game.

The first set of plots contain the expected points added versus the completion percentage for quarterbacks on short, medium, and long throws during the 2011 and 2021 seasons. These plots show how accurate each quarterback is in comparison to the expected amounts of points added from each pass attempt. Ideally, a quarterback would like to maximize both of these statistics.

The second set of plots compare the expected points added compared to the yards per carry for rushers in the 2011 and 2021 seasons. A pair of similar plots were generated for receivers during the same two seasons, which compared the yards per reception and the expected points added for each reception.

Another set of three plots compare the top 20 passers, rushers, and receivers in terms of EPA to their respective position. Essentially these three plots provide a picture of the 20 largest contributors to the scoring outcome of a game among quarterbacks, runnning backs, and receivers. They have the largest probability of adding points to the scoreboard everytime they touch the ball.

A bar graph was also created which depicts the top 10 quarterbacks in terms of touchdown to interception ratios between 2000 and 2021. A larger value is an indicator of more touchdowns thrown for each interception. The final plot displays the decrease in the power run game, as there appears to be a sharp decline in the number of players with more than 300 rush attempts, especially during the 2010s. A line graph is overlayed, which shows the average points per game during that same time span. There appears to be a slight increase in the points per game as the power run game became less popular. 

Finally, a regression model was created to predict the win total for each of the 32 teams during the 2021 NFL season. The model was trained on the 2000-2020 seasons. Four predictor variables were created for each team for each season: passing EPA, rushing EPA, pass defense EPA, and rush defense EPA. These values were then lagged by one season in order to make win predictions based upon the EPA values of the previous season. Ultimately, this resulted in a close estimate of the 2021 wins for each of the teams. The model could be improved by incorporating player trades, weather, and injuries into account. 
